Mice and Men: Hopes and Dreams destroyed

In the novella ‘Of Mice and Men’ John Steinbeck successfully destroys the hopes 
and dreams of the reader and of humanity as a whole when George is forced to 
shoot Lennie. In the book George invents a fantasy in which they both have their 
own farm and Lennie, in particular, is in charge of the rabbits. This keeps Lennie 
and George happy and they frequently talk about this dream and hope they can 
live it with each other. Then Candy gets involved in the dream by promising to 
provide the funding if he can come along too.

The reader's hopes and dreams are partially destroyed when Lennie kills Curley’s 
wife, after she explains how she only ended up on the ranch because she had to 
get away from her mother, who would not let her pursue her dream of becoming 
an actress. Her situation went from bad to worse when she married Curley and 
lived on the ranch, as everyone refused to show her any sort of affection or 
emotion as Curley was so protective over her and they were worried it would get 
them in trouble. “I wasn’t gonna stay no place where I couldn’t get nowhere or 
make something of myself, an’ where they stole your letters”. This shows Curley’s 
wife's hopes and dreams were destroyed by both her mother, Curley and the 
cruelty of the world, and partially Lennie when he kills her. This not only shows 
the destruction of Curley’s wife’s dreams, but that innocence cannot prevail in a 
world as cruel as the one they live in.

When George and Candy are standing in the barn contemplating what to do 
about the death of Curley’s wife, Candy asks George whether this means they can 
no longer get their own place. George’s answer causes the reader as well as the 
characters of the novella to come to the realisation that the dream is dead and 
the hope of the characters is lost. “You an’ me can get that little place, can’t we, 
George?” to which George replies “I think I knowed from the very first. I think I 
knowed we’d never do her”. This confirms to both Candy and the reader that the 
dream is over, and it also marks the point where George not only accepts it won’t 
happen and gives up.

The reader’s as well as the character’s dreams are also destroyed when George 
shoots Lennie. George shooting Lennie shows just how much he cares about him, 
he knows he must be the one to do it. In the novella the only character who truly 
gets to live their dream is Lennie before he dies when George tells Lennie to look 
over the river and and imagine the farm, the animals and the alfalfa patch. “Look 
acrost river, Lennie an’ I’ll tell you so you can almost see it”. This shows George 
knows this is as close to the dream as Lennie will ever get. He gives up hope on it 
becoming a reality because he knows even if they run and manage to get away 
they will end up in some other job and Lennie will get in more trouble and they 
will never achieve their dream due to the fact that the world is a harsh place for 
someone like Lennie to get by.

John Steinbeck shatters the hopes and dreams of the reader as well as humanity 
as a whole in the very last line. “Now what the hell ya suppose is eatin’ them two 
guys?”. Carlson says this about George and Slim, George having just shot his own 
friend. This shows how the other characters on the ranch are unable to 
sympathise towards someone who has just shot his own friend. This also shows 
just how much of a lack of empathy Carlson has and can’t understand George’s 
sorrow. He has no idea what it’s like to have a close friend and can never 
understand the relationship between George and Lennie.

Through each of these events explored, John Steinbeck successfully destroys the 
hopes and dreams of the characters of the novella, those of the reader and of 
humanity as a whole. He does this through the death of Curley’s wife, George 
shooting Lennie and the final line of the book. Our hope that George and Lennie 
will achieve their dream and get their own land that was introduced to us at the 
start of the novella is now destroyed. All the innocence of the world has been 
destroyed leaving us with little hope for the people on the ranch.
